Question:
	 Discuss about the supernatural elements in the story “The Legend of the Sleepy Hollow”.  

Answer:
	The very description of the place, the Sleepy Hollow has a supernatural element in it. It was believed to be bewitched by a high German doctor during the early days of the settlement. Others believed that an old Indian chief, the prophet or the wizard of the tribe held his meetings here before the country was discovered.
	The inhabitants of the place always lived under the sway of some witching power. They always lived in a reverie, could see strange sights and hear music and voices in the air.The whole neighborhood abounds with local tales, haunted spots, superstitions, shooting stars and meteors could be frequently seen.
	The dominant spirit that roared about in this place was that of a headless horseman.//(description)//.
	We are introduced to Ichabod Crane as he arrives at the Sleepy Hollow. He was a man who took great pleasure and interest in supernatural stories, stories of ghosts and goblins, had learned by heart Cotton Mather's History of New England Witch Craft, and other direful tales. He would spend long winter evenings with the old Dutch wives//(Pg-124...1st para)//. He was an exceedingly coward man and was fearfully scared of returning home alone and thus, sang religious songs to himself.
	Ichabod visited the party at Van Tassle's house. The eve was spent in food and music and also by discussing various supernatural stories which people shared with each other.There was the story of  //(Doffue Martling...Pg-121..3rd para)//. Also, Brom Bones shared the story of the headless horseman.
	While returning from the party, Ichabod was chased by the headless horseman.//(detailed description)//
	No trace of Ichabod was found except his hat on the bank of the river. Ichabod was never seen in Sleepy Hollow again. Many believed that he was carried off by the galloping Hessian. The school house soon fell to decay and was reported to be haunted by the schoolmaster.
	Even his voice sounding a melancholy psalm tune could be heard at a distance in the tranquils of Sleepy Hollow.
